Issues/16 (#41)
trulysimple/tsargp: packages/docs/pages/docs/guides/help.mdx

---
title: Help - Guides - Docs
---

import { Callout } from 'nextra/components';

# Help

In this guide, we will be creating a command-line interface that provides different help mechanisms.

## Help option

A straightforward way to provide help for your CLI is by declaring a
[help option](../library/options.mdx#help-option). In its simplest form, it has the following
definition:

```ts
import { type Options } from 'tsargp';
export default {
  help: {
    type: 'help',
    names: ['--help'],
    desc: 'Prints this help message.',
  },
} as const satisfies Options;
```

You can also provide a usage message and a footer:

```ts
import { type Options, style, fg } from 'tsargp';
export default {
  help: {
    // ...
    usage: 'A command-line interface for <purpose>.',
    footer: `Refer to ${style(fg.brightBlack)}<website>${style(fg.default)} for support.`,
  },
} as const satisfies Options;
```

You may want to customize the help message format, e.g.:

```ts
import { type Options, HelpItem, style, tf } from 'tsargp';
export default {
  help: {
    // ...
    format: {
      indent: { names: 4 }, // indent option names by 4 spaces

>       breaks: { descr: 1 }, // 1 line feed before option descriptions

Author: ```suggestion
      breaks: { descr: 1 }, // line feed before option descriptions
```

      hidden: { param: true }, // hide option parameter/examples
      items: [HelpItem.synopsis, HelpItem.required, HelpItem.deprecated],
      phrases: {
        [HelpItem.synopsis]: '💡 %s', // option synopsis with emoji
      },
    },
    headingStyle: style(tf.underlined), // underlined group headings
    styles: {
      descr: style(tf.italic), // italic description for this option
    },
  },
} as const satisfies Options;
```

Which, when invoked with `--help`, would render something like:

```ansi
A command-line interface for <purpose>.

[4mOptions:[0m

    [95m-h[0m, [95m--help[0m
                [3m💡 Prints this help message.[0m

Refer to [90m<website>[39m for support.
```

## Help command

Another way to offer help is by defining a "help" command. This method still uses the help option
from the previous example, but increments it by providing a new syntax to obtain help for _nested_
commands. For example, to present help for a nested command called `cmd`, the following invocations
would be equivalent:

```sh
./my_cli help cmd
./my_cli cmd --help
```

> To achieve this, it's necessary to define a [command option](../library/options.mdx#command-option).

Author: ```suggestion
To achieve this, we have to define a [command option](../library/options.mdx#command-option).
```

We can start with the definitions for the nested commands' options:

```ts
import type { Options } from 'tsargp';

const cmd1Opts = {
  // option definitions for cmd1, including its 'help'...
} as const satisfies Options;

const cmd2Opts = {
  // option definitions for cmd2, including its 'help'...
} as const satisfies Options;

const helpOpts = {
  name: {
    type: 'string',
    desc: 'The name of the nested command.',
    enums: ['cmd1', 'cmd2'], // the names of nested commands

>     positional: true,

Author: Missing `preferredName`.

    required: true, // error if called with no argument
  },
} as const satisfies Options;
```

> Now we can define main command options:

Author: ```suggestion
Now we can define the main command options:
```
